.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" dskid.1: dskid man page
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Darren Salt
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
.\" your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
.\" along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\" John Elliott: email: jce@seasip.demon.co.uk
.\"
.TH dskid 1 "7 April, 2002" "Version 0.8.2" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
dskid - floppy or image file formatter for emulated machines
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PD 0
.B dskid
.I DISKIMAGE
.RI [ "-format FORMAT" ]
.RI [ "-type TYPE" ]
.RI [ "-side SIDE" ]
.P
.PD 1
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Dskid is a utility which will identify how a disk (or image) is formatted. It
reports the required driver and various information about the disk geometry.

.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -type TYPE
Determines which driver is to be used.
.RS
.TP 8
.B auto
Select according to the disk image file. This is the default.
.TP
.B dsk
Use the DSK (CPCEmu format) image driver.
.TP
.B dqk
Use the DQK (compressed CPCEmu format) image driver.
.TP
.B floppy
Use the floppy driver.
.TP
.B myz80
Use the hard disk (MYZ80 format) image driver.
(This format cannot be autodetected.)
.TP
.B cfi
Use the CFI (DOS fdcopy format) image driver.
(This format cannot be autodetected.)
.TP
.B raw
Use the raw driver.
.RE

.TP
.B -side SIDE
Determines which side (0 or 1) of the disk (image) is to be identified.

.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH BUGS
The parameter order is too rigid.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\".SH SEE ALSO
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\" `AUTHOR' here is deliberate...
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
John Elliott <jce@seasip.demon.co.uk>.
.PP
Darren Salt wrote the man pages.
