.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" dsktrans.1: dsktrans man page
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Darren Salt
.\"
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
.\" your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Library
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
.\" along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\" John Elliott: email: jce@seasip.demon.co.uk
.\"
.TH dsktrans 1 "20 April, 2002" "Version 0.9.0" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
dsktrans - floppy or image file formatter for emulated machines
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PD 0
.B dsktrans
.I INPUT-IMAGE
.I OUTPUT-IMAGE
.RI [ "-itype TYPE" ]
.RI [ "-otype TYPE" ]
.RI [ "-iside SIDE" ]
.RI [ "-oside SIDE" ]
.RI [ "-icomp COMP" ]
.RI [ "-ocomp COMP" ]
.RI [ -md3 ]
.RI [ -logical ]
.P
.PD 1
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Dsktrans copies floppy disks or images, optionally converting image types.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -itype TYPE
Determines which driver is to be used to read from the source disk.
.RS
.TP 8
.B auto
Select according to the disk image file. This is the default.
.TP
.B dsk
Use the DSK (CPCEmu format) image driver.
.TP
.B edsk
Use the extended version of the DSK format.
.TP
.B floppy
Use the floppy driver.
.TP
.B myz80
Use the hard disk (MYZ80 format) image driver.
(This format cannot be autodetected.)
.TP
.B cfi
Use the CFI (DOS fdcopy format) image driver.
(This format cannot be autodetected.)
.TP
.B raw
Use the raw driver.
.RE

.TP
.B -otype TYPE
Determines which driver is to be used to write to the destination disk. The
drivers are as for -itype.

.TP
.B -icomp COMP
Select the compression method used on the source disc image file (has no
effect when reading a floppy disc).
.RS
.TP 8
.B auto
Detect from the first few bytes of the file. This is the default.
.TP
.B sq
Huffman coded (SQ / USQ).
.TP
.B gz
Gzipped (gzip / gunzip).
.TP
.B bz2
Burrows-Wheeler compressed (bzip2 / bunzip2).
.RE

.TP
.B -ocomp COMP
Select the compression to be used on output. Compression methods are as for
-icomp, except that bz2 cannot be used.

.TP
.B -iside SIDE
Determines which side (0 or 1) of the source disk is to be read from.

.B -oside SIDE
Determines which side (0 or 1) of the destination disk is to be written to.

.TP
.B -md3
Defeat MicroDesign 3 copy protection. Note that this does not make
.I dsktrans
a circumvention device, since the authors of MicroDesign have placed it in
the public domain and given permission for the copy-protection to be reverse
engineered.

.TP
.B -logical
Rearrange the tracks in the logical order. This option is useful when the
output image type is raw and you're reading a disk with a non-IBM track
layout, such as 144FEAT 1440K or ADFS 'L'.

.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH BUGS
The parameter order is too rigid.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\".SH SEE ALSO
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\" `AUTHOR' here is deliberate...
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
John Elliott <jce@seasip.demon.co.uk>.
.PP
Darren Salt wrote the man pages.
